📚 Literature Text Analyzer

This Python script is a command-line tool designed to assist with literary analysis. It combines a natural language processing (NLP) library (TextBlob) with the power of OpenAI's GPT models to provide insights into a specific quote from Frederick Douglass's Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave.

The program performs three key functions:

    Quote Verification: Checks if a user-provided quote exists within a specified PDF of the text.

    AI-Powered Explanation: Sends the quote to the OpenAI API to generate a detailed, literary-focused explanation.

    Sentiment Analysis: Uses the TextBlob library to perform a quick diagnostic, providing a sentiment (polarity and subjectivity) analysis of the quote.

🛠️ Requirements

To run this script, you will need to install the necessary Python packages and set up your OpenAI API key.
Python Packages

Install the required libraries using pip:

pip install openai python-dotenv textblob PyPDF2

API Key

This project requires an OpenAI API key to function. To keep your key secure, you must use a .env file.

    Create a file named .env in the same directory as the Lit_Project.py script.

    Add your API key to this file in the following format:

    OPENAI_API_KEY='your_actual_openai_api_key_here'

    Replace 'your_actual_openai_api_key_here' with your real API key.

🚀 How to Use

    Place Your PDF: Ensure that the PDF file for Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave is located at the path specified in the script. The current hardcoded path is:

    /run/media/darklord/GVH USB/Python Code/Douglass_Narrative.pdf

    You may need to update this path in the main() function to match the location of your file.

    Run the Script: Open your terminal and navigate to the directory containing the script. Then, execute the script with the following command:

    python Lit_Project.py

    Enter Your Quote: The program will prompt you to enter a quote from the text. Type or paste the quote and press Enter.

The script will then output the following:

    A confirmation of whether the quote was found in the PDF.

    An explanation of the quote generated by OpenAI.

    A sentiment analysis of the quote.

    A hardcoded MLA citation for the book.

📜 Example Output

Attempting to load text from: /path/to/your/pdf/Douglass_Narrative.pdf
✅ PDF text loaded successfully.

--- Quote Input ---
📜 Please enter a quote from 'Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass':
>>> "I prayed for freedom, for I felt that a life of slavery was not a life worth living."

✅ Quote found in the loaded PDF text (case-insensitive match).

--- OpenAI Explanation ---
🔍 Generating explanation via OpenAI (this might take a moment)...
✅ Explanation received from OpenAI.
This quote reveals Douglass's profound desire for liberty and his belief that true life is impossible under the dehumanizing conditions of slavery. He sees freedom not just as a political or physical state, but as a spiritual and existential necessity. The act of praying for freedom highlights his deep despair and his sense of powerlessness, while also demonstrating his reliance on faith as a source of hope and strength in the face of immense oppression. It shows his intellectual and emotional awakening to the injustice of his situation.

--- NLP Diagnostics ---
Running NLP diagnostics with TextBlob...

Sentiment Analysis Results:
- Polarity (Tone): 0.00 (closer to -1 is negative, +1 is positive, 0 is neutral)
- Subjectivity: 0.00 (closer to 0 is factual, closer to 1 is opinionated)
Interpretation: The quote generally conveys a neutral or mixed tone.

--- MLA Citation ---
📝 For 'Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave':
Douglass, Frederick. *Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave.* Anti-Slavery Office, 1845.

--- Program Finished ---

Note: The sentiment analysis from TextBlob can sometimes be inaccurate on complex literary passages, as it is a simple diagnostic. The OpenAI explanation provides a more nuanced analysis.
